---
layout: post
title: "Simulation of Hard Disks : Part 2"
comments: false
description: "post 5"
keywords: "hard disk, collisions, simulation, computational statistical mechanics, random sampling"
---
Hello Everyone !!! Hope you all had an amazing week, If you're in college the new semester just started and I hope you're first week was awesome, I just started grad school and my week was pretty good :). Now moving on with my post, this will be a continuation from my previous post [**'Simulation of Hard Disks - Part 1'**](https://dherath.github.io/2017/hard-disks-1/) where I tackled this very same problem using **`Newtonian deterministic mechanics`**. Ok, so if this is the first time you're hearing the word _**Hard disks**_ I do suggest to read my first post where I explain the terms and the rationale behind simulations of this sort.

In my last post I ended on a note that suggested the previous simulation technique has some limitations. So today I'll start from there, the entire point of simulations for this sort is to predict the behavior of particle systems that we might find in the real world. However such systems have more than 4 particles, and in the previous technique we had to solve the **equations of motion for the entire system for every step**. While this was possible for 4 particles it would be ridiculously time consuming for a system with 1,000,000s of particles. `That in itself is the flaw with this method`. This exponential increase in computational complexity drove many scientists to find better ways of simulating hard disk problems.

**`So the questions is, what is this better way to simulate hard disks?`** that's what todays post is all about.

### Simulating hard disks using direct sampling

As per the title the simulations I will be presenting today are based on a technique called **'direct sampling'**. So what is this _direct sampling?_




 If you look closely at the gif below, you would notice a clear difference with respect to the earlier technique.  In Newtonian mechanics the simulation revolves with time which means that some state _i_ is directly dependent on its previous _i-1_ state. So in a `gif` it looks as if the particles are moving and colliding in real time. However, in this case the the `gif` just shows different _configurations(or samples)_ of some state that could occur at any time. To explain it in a different way, all the samples you see in the _gif_ below are configurations that the disks could take at some point in time(_we don't know when)_ that are valid.

 **`So what does it mean to have a valid configuration?`**


##### So until next time,
##### Cheers!
