---
layout: post
title: "Simulation of Hard Disks : Part 1"
comments: false
description: "post 4"
keywords: "hard disk, collisions, simulation"
---
Hey guys !!! Hope all of you are doing great :), In todays post I'll be demonstrating a very interesting problem of simulating the behavior of hard disks. Now first of all `what are hard disks? and why is this even important?` We all know that matter around us are either solid,liquid or gaseous. All of these states are some combination of particles, without going in too deep we can simply assume these particles are like spheres in 3-dimensions.

**put image of solid,liquid, gas**

Imagine you suddenly found out some new gas, or liquid and you have it in some container, but you don't know any of its properties maybe except its mass or the current room temperature. Now how can you predict what will happen when the temperature changes? or when the the number of particles increase? will it become a liquid or become a solid straight away? Those days these sort of problems required experimentation, but now since we have computers we can run simulations and predict their behavior.

**_Today I'll be demonstrating something along these lines_.** Imagine you have a container filed with some gas, and you want to know the behavior of it. `By behavior I mean what sort of distribution would the velocities & positions of each particle take? Is there some pattern Or is it completely random?`

As it's with any simulation I'll start with the assumptions first.

### Assumptions

1. It's assumed that the temperature,pressure and volume are constant for the entire duration of the simulation. Therefore any change in particle velocity or position would be only because of some collision.
2. The simulation will only have 4 particles, each a 2-D hard disk. A 2-D space inclusive of only 4 particles are considered purely to reduce the computational complexity of the simulation, which you probably will understand when we get into the code. As for the `hard contact` part, this means that the collisions are not damped.
3. Here instantaneous pair collisions conserve momentum, and wall collisions simply reverse one velocity component. Furthermore, between collisions disks move in a straight line just like a free particle.

### Simulating hard disks with Newtonian deterministic mechanics

**put gif image**

In order to numerically solve the equations of motion for all disks, from a given initial condition we need to propagate all disks up to a next collision in the whole system.Then calculate the new velocities of the collided disks and then continue this process until we decide to stop. Ive coded this simulation using `Matlab` and used functions extensively. If you're new to matlab functions click here[] for a quick introduction.

For a given instance in time there can be a couple of scenarios when it comes to collisions.
+ There might be no collisions between disks.
+ A disk might collide with a wall.
+ Two disks might collide with each-other.

For a case where a collision does not occur the state of the system would not change, all the disks would move along a straight line until it collides with a wall or another disk. When it comes to the simulation, the main task is to identify what type of collision happens first (`disk-disk` or `disk-wall`) and between what pair (_in our case we have 4 disks_). Therefore in the first step two separate functions were defined to calculate the time for all possible disk-disk and disk-wall collisions. Afterwards the **`min()`** was taken from all those time values as the next time step when the state of the system changes.

#### Case 1 : A disk collides with a

**put image of a wall collision**
